Extend-or-build docs (#479)
commerce-docs/microsite-commerce-storefront: src/content/docs/dropins/all/extend-or-build.mdx

---
title: Build a new drop-in or extend an existing one?
description: A decision framework to determine when to create a new drop-in component versus extending or composing existing drop-ins, including granularity guidelines, examples, and escalation paths.
sidebar:
  label: Build vs. extend a drop-in
---

import Vocabulary from '@components/Vocabulary.astro';
import Diagram from '@components/Diagram.astro';
import Aside from '@components/Aside.astro';
import Callouts from '@components/Callouts.astro';
import { Steps } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';
import Tasks from '@components/Tasks.astro';
import Task from '@components/Task.astro';
import { Tabs, TabItem } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

Developers often ask: “Should I build a new drop-in, or just add my functionality by extending the existing ones?” This guide provides a simple decision process, focusing on when NOT to extend a drop-in using the provided methods: slots, configuration, style overrides, and public events.

## Vocabulary

<Vocabulary>

### Extending a drop-in

Adding functionality to a drop-in by adding slots, configuration, style overrides, and public events.

### Building a new drop-in

> Building a new drop-in is the process of creating a new drop-in from scratch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Building a new drop-in is the process of creating a new drop-in from scratch using the [Dropin SDK](link).
```

### Slots

Declarative anchor where arbitrary UI content can be injected.

### Configuration

> Configuration is the process of setting the properties for a drop-in container.

Reviewer: Config can also be passed to a dropin "globally" during initialization. Worth mentioning, probably.

### Style overrides

Style overrides are the process of overriding the styles of a drop-in container.

### Public events

> Public events are the process of firing an event from a drop-in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Public events are the process of emitting or observing events from a drop-in.
```

not "firing", preferably. Also, if we have event doc might be better to just link. Same for all above definitions - surely we have these concepts documented.

</Vocabulary>

## Decision flow

Need a simple mermaid flowchart. This one is just a placeholder.

<Diagram
  type="mermaid"
  caption="Decision Flow"
  code={`
flowchart TD
    A[Start] --> B{Is this a one-off customization?}
    B -- Yes --> C[Build local component or extend via slot]
    B -- No --> D{Does an existing drop-in cover ≥60% of the domain?}
  `}

> />

Reviewer: And as discussed, ideally we only have one tiiiiiiny end-state for building a dropin

Like:

1. Use dropin.
2. Extend dropin.
3. Build custom UI (html/js vanilla, or even BYO framework like preact/etc)
4. Build dropin (only if you really need to provide a microfrontend as a service and want to "opt in" to our SDK, etc.)

> ## When NOT to build a new drop-in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Examples of when NOT to build a new drop-in
```

> - Adding a provider-specific script (e.g., reviews widget, chat bubble, analytics pixel).

Reviewer 2: "Reviews Widget" and "Chat Bubble" might actually be good cases for a drop-in if you are building a productized component that will be reused across multiple stores.

Reviewer: It is just as likely that the company offering these "widgets" already provides UI and integration code. For example, BV ratings and reviews can be injected with a script import and a few lines of JS.

- Injecting a promo banner into Cart or Checkout header.

> - Styling changes or minor UI variations.

Reviewer 2: UI variations don't necessarily have to be minor; it depends on what's considered "minor." This implies that if I have major changes, I might need to build one, which is not the case. Some major customization can be done by restructuring the layout of the drop-in, swapping containers with custom frontend components, slots, etc.

- Merchant-specific gating logic (feature flags, content swaps).
- Experimental A/B variant not yet productized.

## When building a new drop-in is justified

| Criterion | Typical Signal |
|-----------|----------------|
| Multi-merchant reuse | Marketplace distribution planned |
| Requires runtime theming & extension | Exposes slots for third parties |
| Clear functional boundary | “Does X” without “also manages Y/Z” |
| Needs isolation | Different cache, error states, performance tuning |
| API orchestration complexity | Normalizes several backend calls with fallbacks |
| Distribution lifecycle | Versioning, changelog, upgrade path needed |

> | Configuration surface | Merchant toggles / provider credentials |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## When building a new drop-in is justified

Never
```
jk. But really, none of the table here makes sense to me. @fnhipster had a good line "if you need to provide a frontend as a service, and you want to build on top of Adobe's Dropin SDK".

Reviewer 2: <img width="720" height="418" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/60b79d6f-36ec-4345-935d-c793d7536ca6" />

| Stripe Payments provider integration | Extend Checkout drop-in | Works inside existing payment step via slot(s) |
| Adding donation checkbox to Cart | Extend Cart via slot | Minor localized UI |

## Anti-Patterns

- “Kitchen sink” drop-in bundling search + personalization + chat.
- Building a drop-in solely to host one script tag.
- Adding slots *inside* purely presentational internal elements (too fine-grained).
- Re-implementing an existing drop-in to add a single new button (request slot instead).
- Shipping a drop-in with *zero* documented extension API (becomes opaque monolith).

## Planning a new drop-in: minimum checklist

| Area | Questions |
|------|-----------|
| Responsibility | Can I summarize it in one sentence without “and”? |
| Extension points | What slots/events are needed by *others*? |
| Configuration | Which options justify runtime config vs. hard-coded? |
| Theming | Do I expose tokens vs. forcing overrides? |
| Accessibility | What ARIA patterns & keyboard flows are guaranteed? |
| Versioning | How do breaking changes surface? |
| Performance | Code-splitting boundaries? |

> | Security | Data isolation, sanitization of slot content? |

Reviewer: Don't like this.

Author: The last table or all of it?

Reviewer: I guess the list is fine... it's just that this is more about building the dropin not whether you should or not.

## Quick decision checklist (Yes/No)

Answer “Yes” for each that applies:

| Question | If Yes, pushes toward... |
|----------|--------------------------|
| Will this ship to many merchants? | New drop-in |
| Do others need to extend it further? | New drop-in |
| Is there already a drop-in covering most of this? | Extend a drop-in |
| Can slots/events meet needs? | Extend a drop-in |

> | Is missing capability only a new slot region? | Request a slot |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Quick decision checklist (Yes/No)

Answer “Yes” for each that applies:

| Question | If Yes, pushes toward... |
|----------|--------------------------|
| Will this ship to many merchants? | Custom UI |
| Do others need to extend it further? | Custom UI |
| Is there already a drop-in covering most of this? | Extend a drop-in |
| Can slots/events meet needs? | Extend a drop-in |
| Is missing capability only a new slot region? | Request a slot |
```

I just don't know if I can distinguish between someone building their own UI and building a dropin. They are the same. It's like asking "should you build a dropin or build an application in preact".

Reviewer 2: There are no good frameworks for building customizable runtime frontends that can act as **micro-frontends** and be extensible and customizable, so we built the Drop-in SDK and Drop-ins. The rule is simple: one-off frontends can be built on any framework—there's no difference between creating a Preact app and a drop-in, as the latter will just add extra complexity that won't be fully utilized. For example, why would you create slots where you can customize the component directly?

However, if you are building a frontend as a service (one-to-many) in a micro-frontend fashion, a drop-in is a great solution. This is why we at Adobe built them as drop-ins: to build frontends that can be extended, customized, and used by multiple storefronts.

## FAQs

**Q: Are slots the *only* extensibility mechanism?**  

> Currently the primary stable surface. If insufficient, propose additional patterns (e.g., data transforms, adapter APIs) via RFC.

Reviewer: No. Technically you can augment the graphql with overrides, and modify transformers for how a dropin uses that data.

Also you can listen to the data in an event and customize from there, within a slot or outside of the slot/dropin render.

**Q: Can a third party fully replace an OOTB drop-in?**  

> Should be extremely rare. Consider whether improving extension points yields lower ecosystem friction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Q: Can a third party fully replace an OOTB drop-in?**  
You can build your UI against the APIs directly rather than using dropins, however you will have to re-implement all logic/functionality currently provided by a dropin OOTB.
```
